Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
Continuing the question from Facebook user Thúy
Phương: "Excuse me, teacher, I would like to ask why, when we
commit sins against sentient beings, we
must repent to the Buddha and
not to the sentient beings themselves? I sincerely
thank you for your merits.
Dear fellow practitioners, there are some sins that
cannot be erased by repenting to the Buddha
because it is repentance to a
wooden or cement Buddha statue. For example, if someone commits
adultery, they say, 'I have
committed adultery, I repent to the Buddha, but
tomorrow I will continue to do it, and tomorrow night I will
repent to the Buddha again. Today I went with my
lover, I repented to the Buddha,
and I thought that repentance would erase the sin,
but tomorrow I will do it again, I will
go to sleep and it will be light.' Repenting to the Buddha
like that cannot erase the
sin. So, with what mindset can one repent to the Buddha to
erase the sin?
Why must we repent to the
Buddha? Because the Buddha teaches
us about karma. Because we know
karma, we can do it."  The
first act of repentance is to pay homage to the
Buddha, showing respect because the Buddha has taught us,
so we know that this is a
blessing. Then, to repent to the Buddha, we
must promise the Buddha that we will not
commit the same mistake again, so that we can stop the
karma. We must also tell the Buddha that tomorrow we
will go and do something to apologize to the
person. The Buddha sees that this may or may
not eliminate the
karma. That's why we must
repent to the Buddha, and how should we repent to
transform the situation? In
cases where an apology is possible, we should
apologize. In cases where an apology is not
possible, we shouldn't go to the person to
apologize. If we apologize, we will die and there will be no
more opportunity to change our karma. In
spiritual practice, repentance must also be done with wisdom; repentance
without wisdom is ineffective and will only
lead to further sin. For example, the neighbor who has always
come to my house to
steal, taking anything he finds. Since I started
studying Buddhism, I've been afraid of him. I apologize, sir, but
before, I never studied Buddhism. I always came over to his house.
Your family is full of petty thieves. So how can
we lose our friendship, lose our neighbors, and what
else is there? You know, if you used to be a petty
thief, now you have to buy
nice things to keep yourself clean. That's how you change your mindset, stop stealing, and
then you can persuade your neighbor to become a monk. If
you say, "Before, I
used to steal from your house,"
then you'd say, "I'm just close to him, but
this petty thief is now trying to teach
me morality." How can that work?
People will still suspect you, right? Therefore,
repentance must be done with wisdom. In
those cases, where you've
wronged sentient beings, you should only repent
to Buddha. Repent to Buddha
by stopping evil deeds and transforming your karma
positively by abandoning evil deeds and doing
good deeds that correspond to those deeds.
You can
transform the karma you've committed. But if
you keep repenting to Buddha and then
continue doing it again, thinking you're repenting to Buddha
to atone for your sins, that
kind of repentance won't atone for your sins.
[music]
m